---
title: "Developer Tools for Machine Learning (ML)"
# These paths are from the root project directory
bibliography: [src/ml.bib]
csl: ./csls/chicago-fullnote-bibliography.csl
---

Will innovative advances in artificial intelligence (AI) be restricted to well-funded startups and big tech companies, or will we develop new AI systems more collaboratively, following the model of open source software? This question has practical and moral implications, like if you'll have to pay for virtual language/research assistants, or if you trust private companies to handle AI safety (alignment), content moderation, and non-discrimination without input from academia or the public sector. 

The answer to this question lies in the ecosystem of developer tools for machine learning, the programs that allow software engineers to re-use published models, datasets, and weights, and combine them in interesting new ways. While recent advances in private large language models have spurred the creation of open ML research collectives [@wiggers_bigsciences_2022], their models are currently not competitive in quality with proprietary systems like OpenAI ChatGPT. That goal will require significant effort on tools and infrastructure, along with research into the promising but unknown capabilities of federated and modular machine learning [@raffel_call_2021].

In this article, I will lay out the existing state of such ML tools in four critical subtopics: model code, datasets, weights, and AutoML tools. I hope to investigate the research question: What are key challenges and opportunities that would enable faster, more collaborative AI development?


For model code, most ML projects use industry-standard machine learning frameworks or libraries, which implement key foundational math operations like matrix multiplication and convolution, along with algorithms like deep neural networks, recurrent networks, and many others. These libraries offer functions to build more complex models out of smaller building blocks, while compiling to highly optimized machine code that can run on hardware accelerators like GPUs, or even custom chips [@noauthor_ai_nodate]. The most popular frameworks are PyTorch, used by most researchers and focused on Python, and Tensorflow, which has better interfaces in other languages and more tools for deploying models [@joury_why_2023]. These frameworks have been somewhat commoditized, with a project called ONNX allowing developers to write a model in one framework and run inference in another framework. There is a library called Keras which offers an even simpler and more high level interface to the major frameworks. However, to modify an existing model, developers still need access to the original code and the knowledge of the framework it is written in.

Most frameworks have built tools to make datasets easier to use. Sci-kit learn and Torch each have a few toy datasets that can be loaded with a single line of code, while Tensorflow has its own Dataset format with thousands of standard datasets for many academic ML tasks [@noauthor_tensorflow_nodate]. Usually a certain ML task will have a primary dataset and benchmark that most authors will use to evaluate and compare their contributions, with some sites aggregating state of the art results [@noauthor_papers_nodate]. Often other datasets for the same task will follow the format of this standard. Sometimes there are many competing formats however without good tools to translate between them, making it very difficult to properly process them for machine learning.

Many authors have focused on taking existing (pre-trained) models and fine-tuning them (e.g. keeping most weights but re-training the last few layers) on specialized tasks and datasets. This relies on the original model authors to publish their model weights — the “learned” values or connections for a trained instance of a model. HuggingFace is a new platform that allows users to upload model weights, download and run inference using pre-trained models with a few lines of code. They also aim to allow fine-tuning although the experience is not as polished. According to VentureBeat they “aim[] to become the GitHub of machine learning,” enabling developers to collaborate using over “100,000 pre-trained models and 10,000 datasets” [@noauthor_hugging_2022].

Finally, another interesting development is the rise of AutoML, where a larger learning system searches for the optimal architecture or hyperparameters for a neural network. There are several tools which make these technologies easy to use, including MLJar which automatically tests and compares many different ML methods including traditional statistical ones like support vector machines, clustering, boosted decision trees, and others by an accuracy metric [@noauthor_mljar_2023], and Ludwig, which focuses more on deep neural network approaches using an encoder/decoder approach [@molino_what_nodate]. These tools radically speed up model development, MLJar offers simpler solutions first, like traditional machine learning rather than deep learning models, which often perform better on certain datasets. This can save developers from endless hours of tweaking and over-engineering. Making these tools accessible for non-technical people is probably the best short-term step towards democratizing machine learning.
